my take on veganism  with it being a moral virtue and not a  moral duty um is pretty straightforward  i haven't seen a compelling case for  yet to kind of jump that last fence and  while i'm not  vegan i am you know  mostly  partially i don't i don't even know what  percentage but i'm eating more and more  vegetarian and vegan meals on a regular  basis and whenever that option is  available to me  um unless i really feel like i need  something and one of the things is  because of this heart surgery  i'm probably going to end up eating more  fish  and less  non-fish meat and maybe cut out non-fish  meat entirely just  have fish because i'm on specific  heart-healthy diet stuff  i think it's morally virtuous i'm just  not convinced that it's a moral duty but  what if  there's no such thing  as duty  what if it simply doesn't exist  in the same sense that  sin  the will of god  divine retribution  and punishment in the afterlife in the  same sense  that those things don't exist  except  inasmuch as they are imagined  and believed in  within the skulls  of a certain number  of christian bipeds walking the earth  what if  in that same sense  this notion of duty  is being something very different from  virtue  doesn't exist  except within the mind's eye  of one  eccentric man  who is now slowly dying of  atherosclerosis  because of his immoral self-indulgent  diet  what then  matt  what if  we live in a world  where figuring out for ourselves  what is and what is not the right thing  to do  cannot rely  on any notion  of duty and it can't even rest  on the consequences  of our actions  because what is the right thing to do  and what is  the wrong thing to do  is profoundly unrelated  to the question  of what we can get away with  doing  what we can do  without suffering harm  without suffering negative consequences  ourselves  even some of my  i'll say former friends who are vegans  uh and and talk about the ethics of it  sustainable eating is one facet of why  they consider it  a moral virtue and perhaps  for those who think it's a moral duty  sustainable eating and the impact of  farming on the on the climate are  probably the too strongest for them  trying to claim it's moral duty i'll  tell you this um i've gotten a bad rap  um because of some kind some some things  i said early on that were kind of glib  but also some back and forth with some  vegan  people who are have converted their way  of life of looking at something um  are often going to be  zealous or  once you find that there's a problem you  start seeing aspects of that problem  everywhere and if somebody's trying to  start an argument i just block them i  have i have zero interest oh and they  can say i'm close-minded i have a show  they can call me here we can have the  conversation here uh they can say i'm  close-minded all day  i don't know what the vegan lifestyle is  but veganism  um  as a view whether it's it could be based  on ethical veganism like somebody  refused to eat or use any animal  products at all for ethical reasons and  there are people who are vegans for  health reasons  with respect to the the ones doing it  for ethical reasons i think it's morally  virtuous i'm just not convinced that  it's a moral duty in the same way that  you know it's morally virtuous of you to  to donate to cancer research and to put  your life at risk to save somebody else  but it's not a moral duty it's not like  you become immoral for not doing those  and that's that's the only take i've got  on on veganism at all he chooses  remarkably  a self-defeating example  he says  that it's not your duty  to risk  your life  to save another  that it's not a duty  to sacrifice  your own life  to help someone else  but there are so many jobs  in which you will find it's explicitly  stated  in the text of the contract you sign  that if you take this job  it is your duty  it is your duty to do exactly that  to risk your life  and sometimes  once in a while  to lose your life  so that someone else can live  or just  so that someone else can have  a chance  there are people in this audience  right now  who have jobs  with that kind of warning  explicitly stated  in the contract  and i have applied for jobs  i have considered going into careers  where it was explicitly stated to me up  front  in text  this job can involve  killing people  and the person who dies  might be you  or might be one of your best friends  so think it over before you sign this  contract  the difference  between a duty  and a virtue  i'm not gonna say to you  that it is always meaningless or always  counterproductive to think in these  terms  on the contrary there are many court  cases where you will find police  officers  firemen  volunteers at orphanages and of course  soldiers in times of war  cross-examined in terms of the extent to  which they were derelict in their duties  which they failed to do things that were  obligatory for them to do as opposed to  merely being incompetent purely failing  to live up to virtues that were above  and beyond  what mere duty would require  but how is it possible  that this man  who is i think not coincidentally a  retired former employee of the american  military  has come to carry around this hammer  and see every problem  as a nail  sobriety  is it a duty  or is it a virtue  why would you even be asking the  question  if you have a friend you care about  let's say you have a younger brother  and he started doing cocaine on the  weekends  and he started doing heroin and fentanyl  on mondays and tuesdays  and you see him going down  a spiral  what do you say  to your little brother  when he tells you he has no obligation  to be sober  that he recognizes  sobriety as a virtue  but not as his duty  not as an obligation  not that it's something  that would make him  evil  for failing to live up to  wouldn't it start to seem  that this distinction  between  duty  and virtue  is nothing but  an excuse making mentality  and an excuse  of a particular kind  that is harder to quit  than the habit  itself  whether we're speaking about drugs  chocolate  yogurt  beef  veal fish  or in your case matt  the excuses you make  for your massively inflated opinion  of your own  intellectual  ability  [Music]  [Applause]